[Music]
welcome to the session on scripts
in this session we will learn how to
create our own commands
the experience you would have had by now
using the text editors within the
terminal would be of great help because
you can open a terminal write your
script
edit it save it come out and then test
it out right there within the same
terminal
so there are certain basic principles
about software development that i
borrowed from the book that is referred
at the bottom
and these principles
guide the way linux operand system has
been developed over the years
so each command
is designed to do one thing very well
and
the commands usually process
lines of text
and not very often binary format
and usually regular expressions are
encouraged to be used
so that the
scripts that we write
are applicable for a wide variety of
input text
and any output that has to be given
should be given to the standard output
and any input that has to be read can be
read from the standard input so that
these commands can be used along with
pipe to combine with other functions
don't be chatty is a principle about
the way most of the linux commands work
that is if there's a command that works
fine then there is nothing to display on
the screen
and the output should be
of the same format as what is accepted
as the input
and if there are specific tasks
that are required to combine various
things then leave it to the user so that
the application that we are developing
is to do just one thing very well and in
the most
generic fashion
as possible
and if you have a requirement to make a
specialized tool
then use a detour so that
you could make it for the specific need
rather than working hard to make a
specialized tool that would also be very
generic because these are
very different kind of
viewpoints when you say script
it need not be only a shell script
okay it can be
a script that would
have a series of commands that could be
interpreted
by any program which works as an
interpreter
and as we have known by now
particularly with respect to the python
which is an interpreted language there
are many languages
that would act as an interpreter
and therefore scripts can be shell
scripts or aux scripts
or said scripts or python scripts or
ruby scripts or perl scripts and so on
in our course we will be dealing with
awk and said also in the upcoming
sessions and the remaining languages
would be dealt in other courses where
those languages will be put to
greater use in application development
awk and said
are included in all flavors of linux and
unix and are integral parts of the
operator system
and therefore combining them with bash
scripts
is particularly an attractive
proposition to
have
a solution that would work entirely
natively within linux environment
a typical text that forms the script is
shown on the left where the very first
line is also actually a comment because
all lines that start with the hash are
comments but the very first line is
special so there is an exclamation mark
after the hash which indicates that
following that exclamation mark
is the path of the
executable which would work as an
interpreter for the rest of the text
that is in the script file
and therefore if you have had
in the first line hash bank slash bin
slash bash it means that it's a bash
script and similarly for all other
scripts
and the shell scripts would contain
commands which you have learnt already
by now several commands
and they would also contain typical
language construction such as loops
variables
case statements and functions and so on
shell scripts are broadly
categorized as two types the ones which
are supposed to be sourced and the ones
which are supposed to be executed
needless to say every script that is
supposed to be sourced can also be
executed
but the difference lies in the way we
invoke
and the effect that it would have
a sourced script is executed using
either a dot
or the keyword source followed by the
name of the script and
lines of commands
will be read from this file and they
would be executed by the shell in other
words during execution
the process id would be the same as the
current shell which has started to
execute those commands
once the script has been completely
sourced the shell will continue with
perhaps some of the shell variables
added or modified in other words
shell scripts which are supposed to be
sourced are meant for the purpose of
preparing an environment typically when
you use a
commercial compiler
then certain environment variables that
are required for the compiler to work
would be available in a script file and
you are supposed to source that script
file
now when you have executable script
files
the situation is slightly different the
shell would actually launch
a child shell within which that
particular code will be executed which
means that the process id of the shell
which is executing the shell script
would be different from the parent shell
which has launched it
once the execution is completed
then the command will be returned back
to the parent shell which means that any
environmental changes that are done in
the executed script will be lost
and usually executed scripts are meant
not to change the environment but to
create new functionality so watch out
for these two intentions of the scripts
before you go on to try them out
now where should you keep these script
files
usually when you keep them in your home
directory or in any directory under the
home directory then you can run them
using either absolute path or relative
path and if you want to run them without
mentioning the path then the script file
has to be located
in one of the directories which are
listed in the path variable the sequence
of directories that are listed in the
path variable using the colon as a field
separator will be searched for when you
type a command at the command prompt and
therefore which folder you are storing
the script file is important and
preferably keep it in the leftmost
directory so that the command that you
have created would be picked up from the
location where you have stored it and is
not to be confused with another command
of the same name elsewhere in the system
now to see some examples of scripts one
good idea would be also to familiarize
yourself with the bash environment so
there are two broad types of shells that
you enter in when you are already logged
into a system and using the gnome
environment if you open a terminal app
then that shell that you are opening is
actually not asking you for any login
and therefore it is called a non login
shell
on the other hand when you
do an ssh into a remote machine then the
shell which you are logging into would
have checked for your login credentials
and then opened up the command line
environment for you and therefore that
shell is called a login shell now
there are set of files that are
processed to prepare the environment for
you
and these are different for the login
shells and the non login shells so here
i have listed some typical
file names where
such
commands shell scripts are located have
a look at them to understand what are
all the variables or functions that are
made available to you when you log in
into a bash environment either through a
terminal app on your gnome user
interface or when you log in using ssh
to a remote computer
do not modify these files unless you
know what you are doing
you will be able to modify these and add
more functionalities by the end of the
course and until then just leave them in
their original form so that your shell
environment is not disturbed
one of the very first things to do in
any programming language is to type out
hello world
so you would like to output something
from your shell script so echo is a very
simple command to output text and we
have already tried that out at the
command prompt and
if you do not provide minus n option
then
there is the automatically a new line at
the end of the
text
and an example of the echo command is
given here where the value of the shell
variable dollar home will be substituted
in its place
and then the output would be my home is
and then slash home slash username
now sometimes if you want to have a more
fancy appearance of the output you could
also use the printf command
and it's a command and not a function
but it has the same
features as the equivalent of it in the
c language you could use format
specifiers for string
integer
floating number etc just like in c
language and here is one example like
that so in printf commands you will have
to specify
backslash n to give a new line while
printing the output
now you can also read
user input into certain variables so the
command is read
and you should provide the name of the
variable into which the input has to be
read
and once it is read then the contents
are accessible using the dollar var for
that particular variable
now there are certain
inbuilt shell variables that are very
useful in trying out the very first
shell script that you would like to
write so you could invoke the shell
script with the different names by
having symbolic links or hard links and
therefore the name by which the
particular script has been invoked can
be printed out using the dollar zero
and it's like asking what is my name and
then the shell script would actually
print out the name by which it was
invoked
dollar hash would give you the number of
arguments that are passed so when you
launch a script as given in the example
myscript.sh
and there are four arguments that are
passed and therefore dollar hash
variable would have the value 4
if you print it out from the script that
is given the bottom my script dot sh
dollar 1
would correspond to the very first
argument that was passed in this case of
the example minus l would be the value
of the string
which corresponds to dollar one
and if you have more than
nine arguments passed
then it's a good idea to use braces to
enclose the number of the argument
because as you know if you would type
dollar one one then it would be
interpreted as
dollar one for the variable followed by
a numeral one as an appended text it's a
good habit to have braces for every
shell variable
while printing it out or using it in the
shell environment
because as you have seen in an earlier
class there are many operations that we
could do to the shell variables
by passing on some additional options
within the braces
dollar star
or dollar add correspond to all the
arguments at once so if you want to
refer to them for printing out etcetera
you could do that and if you enclose the
dollar star in quotes then it would
serve as a single string containing all
the variables that are passed one after
other using space as a delimiter and if
you were to do the same thing with the
dollar at within the course then they
would also be made available but this
time they are available as separate
strings so you could choose which of
these two are
applicable for your script and
accordingly put them to use if you wish
to
store the output of a command as
contents of a particular variable then
you can use the command substitution
feature of the bash and you could use
this
in two ways one way is to use the
backtick which is available just below
the tilde character on the us keyboard
layout you could also use it
by the feature where in single
parenthesis you could enclose a command
and that could also give you the output
of the command as the contents of the
variable
now there are lot of loops that are
available for you to think of a
structured way of programming within a
bash these can be compared with the
corresponding loops of the c language
very similar in their behavior so there
is a for do loop
and
for where in list so list would be a
set of words that are separated by a
space one or more spaces and the where
will be assigned values one after other
which are available in the list and then
the commands are executed so naturally
the commands would use the value of the
variable
in
those commands using the dollar
and then
the closing of the loop is a little bit
different from languages such as c so
for do and done would actually close the
loop
sometimes if your list
has the field separator different from
the space then you could also inform
that to the shell script
by setting the variable ifs in capitals
to whatever string or character that is
used as a field separator
there is a case statement similar to the
switch case that is available in c
language it is also it's also available
in many other languages so you have a
case statement where the variable will
be compared with the patterns that are
provided and wherever the matching
happens then you would have the commands
that will be executed
you could also
break out of some of these or provide a
default option etc so we will learn
those when we go into the depth into the
this particular case statement
case statement is ending with the
reverse of the word case so it is ending
as sac okay case exact loop
you can think of
as the
loop here
the if loop would actually have
conditions test conditions which have to
be
evaluated to true
and then the commands are executed so if
you want the loop to look more like in a
c language then you could put a
semicolon
after the condition and the word then
can be appearing on the same line
and the commands can be any number so
you could either put them one after
other using the semicolon or you could
also put one below other the loop will
be closed with the letters if
reversed so it's a if you loop
that you could think of
now the conditions that are used in the
if loop are
very
many and they are very rich in features
the simplest one would be to test
the expression for the truth value by
using the keyword test itself
and so for example whether the file
exists or not
test minus e file would give you true if
the file exists in the current directory
where the shell script has been launched
and if it doesn't exist then it would
return false
the test expressions can also be used
with single square brackets
so the same test minus e file
could also be written as
minus e file within the square brackets
you could use double square brackets in
case you are intending to use regular
expressions and other complex
operations and you could put the regular
expression knowledge to its full use
within the test conditions by employing
the double square brackets feature
you could use the double parenthesis
option also to perform complex
arithmetic operations for the test
conditions and you can just simply use a
command and whenever the command returns
true
that is upon successful execution
then that means that the condition is
satisfied and then you can go on to the
list of commands that are within the do
loop and if the command returns false
then that loop
within the do and done will not be
entered and you could also have a
pipeline that is you could have a set of
commands which can be combined with
other commands and redirection of output
and combination of logical expressions
using the
double ampersand
or double pipe etcetera so all of those
can also be used in place where the
condition is mentioned
and if you want to have a negation of
that particular condition you can always
use
a
character exclamation in front of the
condition
now the expressions that we have
mentioned which will come within the
parentheses are
also of different types there are unary
expressions and binary expressions so
you know the expression as in there will
be a minus
sign there will be a hyphen followed by
a single character and then there is
only one argument that will be tested
against
binary expression would mean there are
two arguments and then you are doing
some comparison between these two
arguments and these comparisons can be
either string comparison or numeric
comparison or file comparison now the
numeric comparisons are as rich as you
would have in any other programming
language so you could ask whether
two numbers are equal or greater than or
less than and so on
and the string operations are also
equally rich you could also ask whether
the strings are the same or they are not
the same whether the string 1 is less
than the string 2 as compared to the
position of those characters
within the
collation sequence applicable for that
particular shell
and you could also ask whether the
string has a non-zero length
and this can be done in two ways minus n
to ask whether the string is
having a length greater than zero so
then it is true and the opposite of it
using minus z
whether the string
has a length of 0 or not so you could
see that minus n and minus z have
opposite
outcomes
and we have already tried this out
in an earlier exercise
for the test conditions
once unity file comparisons are done by
using a single character after a hyphen
and then the file name and you could
check whether there is a file that
exists by that name whether it is a
directory or a file is it readable or is
it empty is it writable is it executable
or is it owned by the current user or
the default group of that particular
file is it the same as that of the
current user so you can perform all
these checks with a single character
using the unity file comparisons
you could also have binary file
comparisons to check whether a file is
newer or older than another file
the while loop
is similar to the earlier loops that we
have talked about where the condition is
put to use so whenever it is true then
the execution will enter the do loop so
do done loop with the commands in
between would actually be executed only
when the condition is tested to be true
you can also have an opposite
feature where when the condition is
false only then you need to have the
loop to be executed and there you would
actually have until loop so until the
condition is true then the looper
then the commands will be executed which
means that as soon as a condition
is testing to true then the loop
execution will stop
so this is an opposite effect as while
you could also write some functions
these are not the same as the kind of
functions we know in c language it is
just a collection of commands that would
be executed in that sequence whenever
the function is called and calling a
function is very simple just name of the
function alone would be serving as a
command
and if you define the
function before you call it then it
would understand the shell would
understand
it as a function available and we could
run the commands listed in the function
otherwise it would actually look up
whether there is any
command by that name in the
operating system and if it is not
existing then it would actually throw an
error
so you could actually explore every
command that you have learnt till now by
combining them with the shell scripts
and of course there are also more
features available in the bash
programming language we will come to
them in a later session but for now we
can already start putting the commands
that we have learned till now to a good
use by writing those commands within a
script file making it executable and
then we have our scripts ready thanks to
the command line editors we can already
create those scripts and test them out
right inside the terminal itself
you